Once around, the Ring Nebula.
So, the Ring Nebula is a favorite target
for amateur astronomy.
It's in the constellation of Lyra, the
Greek harp. And it there are several
other objects that we've also done
videos about. Vega itself, the bright
star,
the second brightest star, Beta Lyra,
which is a multiple system. the double
double epsylon lyra as well. But uh the
ring nebula is along the line from the
star beta to gamma. It's about 6040
between the two slightly towards beta.
And you can use those as guide stars to
find this object. But it's very small
and quite bright. So with low
magnification, you may not spot it
immediately. Um, with binoculars it
might be quite a challenge. It's it's it
looks rather like a star, but with a
decent amount of magnification, you soon
find that it's not, and it's a more
extended object. Now, it's also known as
M57 because it's the 57th object listed
in Charles Messier's
catalog of annoying things that are not
comets. Messier was a famous French
comet hunter. People used to write to
him to say they'd seen slightly fuzzy
patches in the sky and that therefore
claimed they'd discovered a comet. He
got so fed up with uh this being the
same objects over and over again that he
made a list of over a 100 objects that
uh people need not bother him about. Um
and that's the Messier catalog. And this
is the 57th object in it. So you can see
the position marked slightly more high
resolution there in that 60/40 split
between beta and gamma there. Here's a
photograph of it with beta and gamma
shown as the bright blue stars there and
the arrow pointing out the position of
the ring nebula. Now you can see that at
this wide field of view, it's hard to
tell that that is not just a single
point of light. doesn't look like it's
got very much structure. And this is the
point about needing more magnification.
Now, we estimate that it's about 25,000
light years away, but it's somewhat
difficult to get a realistic
estimate for this because in order to
know the distance, we kind of need to
know uh something that's nearby to it or
its mass or its brightness in great
precision in order to use some of the
techniques for estimating distance. And
these sorts of nebula, well, that's a
little difficult.
If you zoom in a bit further with a 75
mm refractor, a 3-in telescope, then you
start to be able to see the shape. You
see this ring and perhaps that it's
somewhat elliptical. Um, and that
there's some structure within the ring
there. So, that's a nice small telescope
view of the Ring Nebula. And it's only
about 1 and 1/2 by one arcsec. So you
can see just how tiny this really is. Um
it's pretty much on the limit of what
you might be able to resolve um uh in
any great detail with small instruments.
And what we think we're looking at is a
near endon view of what's called a
bipolar outflow. So we think that the
ring itself is mostly this Taurus of
material around the center of the
structure with some loes
uh along the spin axis and that the spin
axis is not quite aligned about 30° away
from our line of sight giving us this
somewhat elliptical projection when we
look at it.
Right in the center we have a small
star. And this was first picked up by
Von Han in 1800. And he announced that
he'd seen a central star right in the
center of the nebula. Now he was doing
well because it's actually magnitude 15
and that's right on the limit of uh
amateur uh observations really with uh
optical equipment. You would need uh a
long exposure uh camera. And of course
in 1800 he had no such technology. So uh
I don't think he even had film. He was
definitely doing this by eye. But uh
interestingly he did look back later and
announced that it appeared to have
disappeared. Um and so perhaps seeing
conditions weren't as good and uh it had
gone away.
So about 2,000 years ago things would
have been very different in this part of
the sky. we would have seen a powerful
AGB star, an asimtoic giant branch star.
So an evolved red giant with a double
skin onion layer of fusion of hydrogen
and then a layer underneath that of
helium and then a a growing carbon
oxygen core in the center. But these
stars, they don't last very long in that
state. It's a fairly short-lived affair
before they consume the uh helium and
the energy outflow blows out the outer
layers of the star as one of these
planetary nebula as they're called. Um
so called because people thought they
looked a bit like planets with really
bad uh ancient telescopes, but clearly
they're not.
And the central star that is in the
middle of the picture there, that little
white dot, is the dead dying core of
carbon and oxygen. Just over half a
solar mass remaining of what was once a
much more massive star, perhaps uh five
or six times the original mass of the
sun.
And it's glowing white hot, but it's
actually even hotter than that. It's way
off into the realms of 125,000
uh Kelvin. So most of the light output
is coming out in the ultraviolet part of
the spectrum. So skewed is the black
body radiation distribution of such
things. And that led to when these
so-called white dwarfs were first
discovered, the uh spectrum of the light
looked very very peculiar indeed and was
a bit of a mystery until we understood
that they are these dead nuclear cores
with this immense temperature because
they're not releasing any more energy by
nuclear fusion anymore. They're just
going to cool down from their original
billion degrees that they would have
been when trapped in the center of the
uh uh much larger star um and radiate
their energy away to space gradually
cooling to become black dwarfs. And the
evolutionary process of stars like this
is shown in this diagram here. So, um,
you would have a fairly modest star that
would become a subgiant as it gradually
started to run out of, uh, hydrogen in
its core. Then a full red giant with an
inert core of, uh, helium in the center
and the hydrogen burning in a layer over
it.
Eventually, the core would get massive
enough and hot enough to ignite the
helium to
brighten the star up and take it over on
what's called a blue loop. Although
perhaps only over to the yellow part of
the diagram, depending on how massive it
is. So that's the path that's shown
here. But if it was a particularly big
star, it can become blue hot again. But
only for a while because that helium to
carbon fusion dumps carbon and in fact
oxygen as well that's manufactured into
the core in the center. Uh building
another inert core and uh that then
causes the star to go into its second
phase of being a red giant a so-called
AGB as giant branch star.
The uh heat output from all of the
helium burning can push with radiation
pressure outwards, swelling the star up,
but also eventually driving the outer
layers away. And the star will evolve to
a post AGV phase, pushing off a
planetary nebula and then leaving the
white dwarf to be in initially
incredibly hot but fairly rapidly cool
and then slowly slowly cooling down to
become a black dwarf off into the very
very distant future.
So when we look at the ring nebula, we
can see that the nebula has been
expanding outwards for a period of just
1,600 years. So it's not long past the
AGB stage really. And uh we can even
look at images over a 50-year time scale
and work out that it is expanding by
about one arcsec every hundred years or
so. And uh that aligns with measurements
that the spectroscopists give us where
they can see the Doppler shift of the
light uh in the range 20 to 30 km a
second. So that agrees with the
rate of expansion of the material
moving.
Now lovely picture here. When we look at
the Ring Nebula with a modern color
camera, we get a fantastic picture like
this one where you can see the central
star in the middle. The very extreme
edge is red in color and then as you go
deeper it goes yellow and then into the
center you've got the blues and greens.
And explaining what these colors are all
about um was a bit of a puzzle. was
first noticed by William Huggin, English
amateur astronomer back in 1864 who took
the spectrum that the
uh lines of emission were clearly
visible and I've got some of them shown
at the bottom of the screen there.
You've got the red ones and the bluey
green ones clearly showing up as where
the gases were glowing. And he realized
that this was characteristic of fluesing
gases. Fluesing because the intense
radiation, a lot of that ultraviolet
from the central star is ionizing the
gas. And then as the gas deionizes, it
gives off its characteristic
wavelengths.
That led Huggin to realize that these
things were gaseous and were not just an
unresolved cluster of stars. And so we
began to understand that these were
interesting types of nebula.
But we didn't work out what the gas was
in the central region for quite some
time. The green light that comes out
turns out to have the same color, the
same emission lines as the aurora. This
is a picture of the Aurora Borealis over
northern Norway here
showing the lovely green light in the
skies with these curtains of uh waving
uh patterns of light.
But when you take the spectrum of it, we
had these mystery lines um around about
that 4 and 500 nanometer region. And
nobody could work out what element this
was. The astronomers coined the term
nebulum,
thinking that there may be a new element
that had been discovered out in deep
space. And then of course when they
realized it was the same as the aurora,
they thought maybe nebulum was present
in the upper atmosphere of the earth as
well. And this is all caused by the uh
recombination of this ionized gas. the
electrons jump down from a high energy
excited state to a lower state. And
depending on the difference in the
energy levels, you get the different
amount of energy in the photons of light
that come out. And so the different gaps
between the different levels all give us
different energies, different
wavelengths, and therefore different
colors. And this wasn't the first time
that we had been seeing a mystery
element from space because we have a
spectrum of the sun here. And
when you look at this, there's a very
prominent yellow emission line there.
And that didn't correspond to any
element on Earth that was known at the
time, again, back in the 1860s.
And this new element was given the name
helium for Helios, the Greek god of the
sun and very much uh was known in the
sun as being a mystery element before we
were able to find it here on earth. And
there were two people that separately
made the discovery. So we had uh Luigi
Palmy
looking at gases coming from Mount
Vuvius, a volcano in Italy, and he was
able to find that there was a gas
present in there that also showed that
yellow line. And in 1895, Sir William
Ramsey managed to extract the gas from
uranium ore. Now, these are both from
the similar source. they are from the
radioactive decay of heavy metals in the
uh rocks of the earth uh releasing this
helium as it's been called.
And so we we now had the element and we
knew it wasn't something that uh was
completely alien.
And the explanation took a while because
eventually we realized that the
green color in the nebula and in the
aurora was from good old oxygen, but not
O2 as we breathe down at near ground
level in the dense part of the
atmosphere, but way up high above 100
kilometers
into the near vacuum of the outer layers
of the atmosphere. The oxygen gets
attacked by ultraviolet radiation and uh
particle beams from the sun and the O2
is split up into single oxygen atoms and
these are then wandering around in this
free uh state
so far apart that they rarely bump into
anything else. So they don't combine
back to O2 very quickly. And it is the
oxygen atoms whose energy levels
are responsible for giving us the green
color.
Now this can only happen in the very
very high atmosphere in this near vacuum
state or in the very tenuous gas of
nebula. And the reason is down to some
rules of quantum mechanics. I've got a
illustration of the shape of different
orbital patterns of electrons in 3D
round an atom here.
And if you look at them, you can see
that some are symmetrical and some are
actually mirror reflections,
anti-ymmetrical.
And if you change from one energy level
to another, and you flip the symmetry
from symmetric to anti-ymmetric or the
other way, you're changing the symmetry
of the system. And that change in the
symmetry means you're flipping the
electric field and you're more able to
output some electromagnetic radiation in
the form of a photon.
Energy states that change without
changing the symmetry don't change the
electric field and therefore they are
much less likely to occur and so much so
that we call them forbidden lines. the
forbidden transforms of one energy state
to another are uh something that really
doesn't happen very often at all. But in
quantum mechanics, none of these rules
are absolute. They just uh massively
degrade the probability of it happening.
But up in this very very tenuous
environment, you've got a lot of time.
the atoms are wandering around and it
takes a very long time um tens hundreds
even thousands of seconds before they
bump into another
uh particle and dump their energy by
collision.
So there is lots of time for these
unlikely
low priority low probability decay modes
to occur and so these slow symmetric
modes do happen because uh there's
enough chances for it to occur before
the energy is released in some other way
and so you get these forbidden lines.
Now, we hadn't seen this particular
green color in the lab basically because
you couldn't make a vacuum thin enough
containing atomic oxygen um and do the
experiment to try to see what uh light
came out until of course very recently
when it's been done. And so if we look
again at the spectrum of the light from
different regions of the ring nebula, we
can see that the red is hydrogen, the
classic
H alpha, the uh emission line at 656.28
nanmters that we often use for imaging
the sun. The yellow comes from helium as
discussed discovered in the sun. And the
blues and greens are from a pair of
emission lines from atomic oxygen at 495
and 500 nanometers in the green part of
the spectrum there.
And so we now understand exactly what's
going on in these things. And of course
it makes sense that this advanced uh red
giant star, this AGB star had produced a
shell of hydrogen and then helium and
then deeper in the star carbon and
oxygen. And that structure is reflected
in the layering of the colors that we
see in the Ring Nebula. And so I hope
you've enjoyed that trip once around the
Ring Nebula. I'll leave you with this
fantastic image that shows quite a lot
of the detailed structure of uh the
internals of this expanding planetary
nebula.